---
title: 'Legal stuff'
date: '2018-11-14T03:20:07+00:00'
status: publish
permalink: /legal
author: donaldjenkins
excerpt: ''
type: page
id: 142
thumbnail: ../uploads/internet-censorship.jpg
be_title_toggle_show:
    - '1'
swp_pinterest_image_url:
    - ''
swp_open_graph_image_data:
    - 'false'
swp_open_graph_image_url:
    - ''
swp_cache_timestamp:
    - '432309'
wp_criticalcss_cache:
    - ''
wp_criticalcss_css_hash:
    - d2f9270e
wp_criticalcss_html_hash:
    - ''
wp_criticalcss_manual_css:
    - ''
wp_criticalcss_override_css:
    - ''
---
Legal stuff
===========

This page sums up the way this Website operates, the laws that apply to it, and the values underpinning our action. Your use of this Website, however, means you have also read and agreed to the full terms of our [Terms](/legal/terms/) and [Privacy Policy](/legal/privacy/) (<q>policies</q>) linked to in the table below. These documents are legally binding and may be subject to change.

Any material change in our policies will be advertised on Donald Jenkins’s [Twitter account.](https://www.twitter.com/donaldjenkins)

<table id="“legal-policies"" summary="This Website’s policies"><thead><tr><th scope="col">Terms</th><th scope="col">Privacy Policy</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>The *[](/legal/terms/)*Terms are the conditions under which we welcome you to this Website \[[changelog](/legal/terms/changelog/)\].</td><td>The *[](/legal/privacy/)*Privacy Policy explains how we collect and process your information \[[changelog](/legal/privacy/changelog/)\].</td></tr></tbody></table>

Who we are · Our undertaking to you
-----------------------------------

The operator of this Website, donaldjenkins.com (<q>this Website</q>), an unincorporated, not-for-profit entity based in the state of New York, and owner of the associated domain name, is a private individual, [Donald Jenkins](https://www.twitter.com/donaldjenkins) (<q>we</q>). We have designed its Terms and Privacy Policy, which you can access at the top of this page, to be consistent with the following principles:

- Because we believe that you shouldn’t have to provide personal information to visit a website, you may use this Website without registering an account. In fact, we don’t have accounts.
- We give you advance notice, and keep a trace, of any changes in our [Terms](/legal/terms/changelog/) and [Privacy Policy](/legal/privacy/changelog/).
- We provide a complaint mechanism for the handling of personal data.
- We do not sell your personal data.
- Our content is published under a [Creative Commons license](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/).

We are committed to:

- Describing how your information may be used or shared.
- Using reasonable measures to keep your information secure.
- Never selling your information or sharing it with third parties for marketing purposes.
- Only sharing your information in limited circumstances, such as with our partners if required to make this Website operate, to comply with the law, or to protect you and others.

Information we collect, summarized
----------------------------------

This Website does not collect personal information, except in the following two cases:

1. Information you send to us *voluntarily* when you send us emails using the [Contact Form](/contact/).
2. when you visit this Website, we *automatically* receive the IP address of the device (or your proxy server) you are using to access the Internet, which could be used to infer your geographical location. This is used to track this Website’s visitor statistics, using the third-party service [Google Analytics](https://analytics.google.com:).

Please note that Google Analytics stores cookies on the device you use to access this Website to keep track of usage data. The information generated by these cookies is transmitted to Google’s location in the United States, and stored there. Since this Website is a not-for-profit structure, however, it has [opted out](https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/2444872) of Google Analytics’s advertising features.

You may contact the owner and [Data Controller](https://iapp.org/resources/article/data-controller/) by snail mail at the following address: Donald Jenkins, 99 Wall Street, Suite 1047, New York NY 10005, or by email using the [Contact Form](/contact) on this website.